# ELIZA_emulator_by_GPT4
After about half a century, GPT-4 was prompted in one shot to suggest a python script that emulates a basic version of the 1966 ELIZA. The script in this basic version should be only using pattern matching, while keyword matching and ranking were not included in this version.
It has to be emphasized that, while the script is based on Weizenbaum’s algorithmic instructions, it is by no means a kind of trivial copy or replica of the original code. In this respect, a 2023 AI has retro programmed a vantage AI. Just copy/paste the code and enjoy, and if you like, ask GPT-4 to extend it to other techniques, e.g. keyword matching and ranking.

Developed in the mid-1960s by Joseph Weizenbaum at the MIT, ELIZA was one of the first AI programs to simulate conversation with humans (Weizenbaum 1966). Named after Eliza Doolittle, a character in George Bernard Shaw’s play Pygmalion, this rule-based chatbot compiled simple pattern matching techniques to process and respond to user input prompts. The bot also succeeded the conversational simulation by processing scripts. Among these scripts, the most famous was the so-called DOCTOR script, which emulated a Rogerian psychotherapist.
Briefly, Weizenbaum had defined for ELIZA a set of input patterns and corresponding output patterns (Weizenbaum 1963). When the user prompted something to ELIZA, it matched the statement against each pattern. If it found a match, it would choose a response template, reflect the matched groups, and return the response. Among various techniques explored by Weizenbau, he also implemented the use of keyword matching and ranking to decide which rule to apply.
Indeed, ELIZA had a key quality of making conversational situations seem as if it understood what the user was truly meaning. In other words, it was able to use early-stage prompt techniques to manipulate the user to manifest an internal state of belief. Users were engaged and intuitively motivated to believe in the reasonability and meaningfulness of ELIZA’s statements, which were provoked by the tokens embedded in the prompts of the users themselves. This generative quality was realized by ELIZA by rephrasing the user’s input and counter-prompting with open-ended questions. Because ELIZA relied on matching patterns and didn’t have true language or context association, its ability to have substantial chats was very restricted. However, despite its very limitations, as a vital pilot and early prototype, ELIZA made a significant contribution to the advancement NLP systems, and raised great attention towards the possibilities of realizing AI-driven conversation.
See: https://medium.com/@vaseghisam/gtp-4-emulating-eliza-in-python-90a18bdca2da
